Morning.
Morning. Welcome, welcome. Good to see you all.
And we will, we're obviously, we're faring our way
through the briefing.
It's about is our third go, I think. It isn't.
Um, look, uh, welcome.
So, um, if you quickly introduce yourselves
and we'll just carry on from we left off team.
Great. Thanks.
Excellent. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Um, and committee members, this is the, this
Is the, Hmm. Long-term
Insights. Long-term Insights Briefing.
Yeah. Yeah. So our first,
First one, first field. Okay.
So, um, thanks Chair
and committee members for the opportunity to speak
to you today on our long term Insights Briefing,
building New Zealand's long-term Resilience to Hazards.
My name is Ben King. I'm the Secretary
and Chief Executive of the Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
I'm here with my colleague, James Palmer, who is, uh, the,
the Secretary and Chief Executive for Environment
and the Ministry for Environment.
Um, while this is my first time, uh,
before this committee, I'd like
to acknowledge the bipartisan approach, uh,
that is taken in general on emergency
management and national resilience.
The committee I usually report to the, uh,
government Administration Committee, um, the chair, uh,
Camilla Blich and Mr. Mitchell have a really good work
relationship building allege, uh, their approach.
And I was delighted that James tells me, um,
it's a similar approach here.
I'd like to start by acknowledging, uh, those
who tragically lost their lives in January's, uh,
weather events, our thoughts, uh,
with those communities affected.
And I'd also like to acknowledge the impact weather events
more recently, uh, across the Lower North Island, while
how long-term Insights Briefing
was prepared before these events.
Uh, they do bring into focus the stark reality
of the challenges we face as an agent, in line
with the intent and guidance
for long-term insights briefings.
Our briefing, uh, was produced independently of ministers
and does not comment on government policy
or provide recommendations.
So it's a think piece, a piece of assessment intended
to look beyond the immediate political horizon
and help us all parliament, the public
and the private sector plan for future challenges.
The focus of our briefing is national resilience.
We define this as the ability to prevent, minimize, absorb,
adapt to recover from, and transform through shocks
and stresses resilience
and enhance safety, security, prosperity of our people.
Historically, new Zealand's approach
to risk management has been largely reactive.
However, we know that human
and financial costs of that model, uh, unacceptably high.
So our briefing argues for a strategic, proactive approach,
making the investments
and the hard choices now that will prevent loss
and harm in the future.
To be proactive, we must be clear-eyed about the landscape.
We are in New Zealand as a multi-aged environment,
and we are consistently ranked amongst the countries
with the highest disaster risk in the world.
National Risk Register identifies 14 major hazards,
but in this briefing we have mostly focused on the big six,
those hazards that either have the potential
for catastrophic impact
or occur so frequently
that the accumulative cost is immense.
DPMC takes the challenges outlined in this briefing.
Seriously, over the last year,
we have reprioritized our resourcing, allowing us
to increase the number of staff we have dedicated
to implementing the National Risk and Resilience Framework.
From three to 13,
these staff are focused on working across government
to proactively build resilience.
And late last year, we've supported the Prime Minister
to deliver the first ever national Risk
and Resilience report back to cabinet,
which identified opportunities
to strengthen accountability and oversight.
We also reshaped the governance system, which, uh,
which oversees the, uh, national Resilience System, uh,
with the National Security Board
and Emergency Management Board,
and a National Hazard Risk Reduction Board reporting into a
National Resilience Board as the umbrella.
Well done. Thanks very much for the opportunity
to appear before you today.
Um, we look forward to the discussion
of the, of the Briefing.
And pass now to James.
Thank you being Koto, uh, chair committee members.
Um, thanks Ben for the introduction
and also acknowledging the tragic loss of life, uh,
and the ongoing disruption caused
by our most recent severe weather.
Uh, just also wanna acknowledge, uh,
the D-P-M-C-N-M-E fee team who developed this briefing, uh,
a number of whom are with us, uh, today,
and just c in the insights that they've provided,
and also the way in which the agencies, uh,
have worked together, uh, for the ministry.
Working with DPMC, uh,
on this has been a particular, uh, privilege.
Uh, shortly after our team started this work, uh,
the public sector was mobilized, uh,
once again alongside communities to deal, uh,
the latest real life demonstration of the very issues
that raised, and that was, uh, severe weather, uh, in the,
uh, Nelson Tasman, uh, district.
And throughout the time that we've developed this, uh,
and there have been ongoing events, I've been struck
by two key thoughts.
The first of which is that as a country, we need
to stop being surprised.
Mm-hmm. Uh, events like these are not anomalies.
Um, they're known features of life in New Zealand.
Uh, they've had them many times in the past,
and they'll continue, uh, to have a science has told us
for decades that as a small island nation,
nations straddling a tectonic plate boundary
and surrounded by warming oceans.
Our hazard profile is not a matter of if,
but it is when second,
there is an enormous opportunity in that predictability.
If we accept the certainty of these events,
we can become one of the most prepared nations in the world.
New Zealand currently loses 0.6%
of GDP annually on average to natural hazards.
That's nearly twice the OECD average.
Since 2010, we've spent $64 billion
as a country on hazard related costs,
and 97% of that expenditure has been on response
and recovery, and only 3% has been spent on
reducing risk in the first place.
That balance, uh, is unsustainable
and that core concept we wanted to highlight, uh,
with this briefing, how do we shift
as a country from being reactive
and focusing on recovery to expecting, anticipating,
preparing for, and reducing, uh, risk ahead of harm?
Han our briefing outlines, uh, what Ben referred to as six.
Uh, the big six hazards, the major, uh, risks
that shape New Zealand's resilience landscape.
We begin with earthquakes still the most
consequential of our hazards.
Uh, the Alpine fault, the southern margin, uh,
and the Wellington Fault all hold the potential to, to, to,
to rupture in ways that could radically transform our cities
and infrastructure and our daily lives
with national consequences.
Uh, I particularly turn, um, the, uh, the, the committee's,
uh, attention toward the, uh, the Alpine fault.
And the briefing is noted, the 75% probability
of a rupture within the next 50 years.
Uh, the Alpine fault is unusual, uh, in international terms
for its predictability.
Uh, it does rupture consistently, reliably, every 300 years,
and it is now overdue,
and there is an 80% probability of
that being a more than a zero, uh, a an eight magnitude, uh,
earthquake with massive consequences
for particularly the south island,
but also New Zealand's infrastructure, tourism, uh,
and economy alongside the sits volcanic activity, uh,
a continual presence in our geology, uh,
and an unexpected eruption in tamaki makoto,
or renewed unrest in Taranaki, uh,
would bring swift far reaching consequences for communities
and the economy, uh,
and also draw the committee's attention to the probabilities
and the briefing around, uh, a interruption, not taranaki.
Uh, it's something we should anticipate this century.
We also face, face the threat of tsunami, less frequent,
but devastating when they come, often in the wake
of some large earthquakes.
Uh, we already fear
and capable of compounding the damage at
extraordinary speed.
Uh, and the geological re record shows
that New Zealand has been hit
by large tsunamis along its coastline many, many times.
So again, not a matter of if, just a matter of when
severe weather has become the hazard we see and feel.
Most often the storms, landslides,
and floods of recent months are not outliers.
Our warnings, these events are clustering, intensifying,
and interacting with where
and how we've built our homes, roads, and infrastructure.
Some hazards feel newer, even if the risks are very real.
Space weather, for example,
where a major solar storm could disrupt the satellite based
systems that underpin everything from our trading networks
to our emergency services.
And pandemics, of course, remain an enduring risk,
reminding us that biological threats can escalate quickly
and globally across all six.
One. Truth is constant.
A disaster only occurs when a hazard meets people assets
and the systems that are exposed and vulnerable.
We cannot stop the earth from moving
or the weather from intensifying at least, uh,
in the short to medium term.
But we can shape what is placed in harm's way
and how well it can withstand the shocks to come with.
That requires systems, legal planning, financial, digital,
scientific that consistently drives safer choices.
And a cornerstone of that system is reliable, accessible,
decision ready, hazard and risk information.
This information is in every sense, national infrastructure.
Yet in many of the data sets that should, uh,
anchor our decisions, such as landside,
slide susceptibility, stormwater capacity, rainfall,
intensities, soil stability, flood extents,
they're all fragmented, aging,
and in, uh, inconsistently maintained
and funded at present,
recent events have shown the cost of that gap.
When information is unclear
or unavailable, decisions default to reaction
and reaction is slower, more expensive,
and more damaging for communities.
But information is only one part
of the resilience landscape.
A risk profile is shaped by broader forces.
Some that increase our exposure
and some that strengthen our ability
to withstand shocks On the exposure side are
our development patterns.
Most of our towns and cities built on river mouths
and coastal mouths, our geographic isolation,
our concentrated economy, and an aging population,
and a growing dependence on digital systems,
all occurring against the backdrop of global instability,
stable institutions, deep scientific capability, high levels
of social trust, and strong partnerships
with across central government, local government, iwi,
industry, and community can be a strength, uh,
when they are nurtured.
Crucially, hazards do not operate in isolation.
Risks are increasingly cascading.
A flood triggers a power failure,
which disables communication,
which then escalates into a health emergency.
Our systems must be designed
with this interconnectedness in mind.
This is why our briefing emphasizes the
unavoidable choices ahead.
None are cost free. Delaying decisions only
increases the eventual price.
And these choices are challenging, not
because the risks are unknown, but
'cause information is imperfect.
The incentives of different groups vary,
and the trade-offs are real,
being explicit about those trade-offs, which is gained.
Uh, what is gained, what has given up
and why allows decisions to be made in transparent,
durable, and fair manner.
The encouraging news is that momentum is building.
Ben's already referred to the investment made in Department
of Prime Minister and Cabinet around the National Risk
and Resilience framework.
The National Adaptation plan,
and the work that we've done
with this committee in the last few years around adaptation
and further policy and legislative, uh, changes to come
before this committee later this year.
And reforms to our planning
and environmental management system, which was of course
before, uh, this committee right now, as well as reform
to the science system
and to, uh, the emergency management system,
are all starting to build a much more
coherent national approach.
New digital tools will for the first time,
provide a single national channel for consistent
and assured hazard information
to flow into those statutory plans
that you are overseeing the policy for the spatial plans
and the regulatory plans, infrastructure investment, uh,
which is topical, obviously
with the National Infrastructure Plan,
uh, released this week.
And local adaptation decisions that will be part of the, uh,
adaptation legislation
before committee later this year
are replacing a current system
where 78 councils produce 78 different sets of hazard maps,
models and risk layers.
All that differ, all with their gaps, uh, in coverage.
So we're standing at a rare moment
where the resource management reforms,
the climate adaptation, the emergency management reforms,
digital enablement,
and the science system reforms are all actually
converging together.
They give us the chance to design a risk
and planning system that's fit for the future,
rather than patching together one from the past.
And there is scope to go even further
by empowering our communities, harnessing data
and technologies like AI, designing smarter
and more adaptive infrastructure, including the use
of nature-based solutions and natural infrastructure,
and strengthening our investment models that spread risk
and accelerate resilience.
Ultimately, national resilience is not about just about
reducing losses, it's actually about unlocking gains,
a safer, more resilient, and more insurable.
Uh, New Zealand is one where people
and businesses thrive, not only when conditions are easy,
but also when they are hard.
Resilience is a long game, and it requires all
of us central government, local government, iwi, industry,
and households all to play their part.
The future does not simply happen to us.
It's something that we can shape together.
Thank you for your time, and we welcome your questions.
Thank you very much. You both,
it's a very sobering way start.
Okay. Uh, look, I've got a range
of questions we'll, uh, start with
Thank you. Um, thank
you both for your work on this
and your teams at the two agencies.
Um, and I think it speaks to the importance
of having think pieces like this that sits outside of
election cycles and independent of ministers.
So I will just say that it's a shame that all
of these are gonna be asked except
for one, um, going forward.
Um, but just a couple of questions that I,
that I'll start with, if that's all right.
Mr. Chu, um, you have laid out quite clearly, um,
throughout the report, sort of, you've alluded
to existing pieces of work that are building momentum.
You've made the point that we are not
sort of starting from scratch.
There is work to, uh, towards this.
I wondered whether you also, I took a look at pieces
of work, um, that perhaps may not be continuing now
that would've contributed
to towards the goals that you've mentioned.
Um, you've mentioned the need for social license,
so things like the social cohesion work program, things like
that, that would help build, um, uh, resilience
and social license.
Did you look at other things
that perhaps might add to this work program?
I'm, I'm happy to, um, have a, have a have a go this.
So the, I mean, social cohesion is such an important, um,
underpinning piece of fabric, which goes
through basically any risk or any threat or any hazard.
Um, social occasions becomes, um, really important.
So at a, at a broader level across governments,
so not necessarily in the context of this,
but, um, without, we are long
and actively talking about how we continue
to build the programs, how we, um, get at, uh, uh,
you know, helping people who are in need, anticipating
where needs will come, building the, the social cohesion,
doing it through, um, a rank, you know, through SD
through ethnic communities, and also working
with the communities themselves.
So we are, it's a active discussion
and something we are pushing in on. Uh, so
Has stopped As No, no, no.
Well, our, we as a, as a system, as a public service,
we certainly haven't stopped, um, the work
and we haven't stopped the, um, the understanding
and the commitment to knowing
that social cohesion is something
that we need to continue to build.
So part of that then is trust in institutions.
You've laid this out in your report as well.
Um, there are other think pieces that point to the fact
that globally trust in institutions is declining.
Um, and I wondered whether through this piece of work,
you had perhaps seen some good examples overseas,
the international models that you've laid out in this
report, uh, specifically points to response to security, um,
and defense sort of measures perhaps based on risk
and resilience in those countries.
But outside of that,
and if you look at what we need, what pillars we need
to build trust in institutions, was there anything
that you came across that isn't in this report
that you thought might be useful?
Uh, well, I don't, I don't think so.
Let me just check. Yeah, I,
I might, I might just make one, one comment.
I'm aware that the, um, the global Edelman survey
that's done of, uh, of trust around institutions globally,
which is considered to be rigorous
and, uh, internationally, uh,
consistent from a benchmarking point of view,
is certainly showing that, uh, trust
and confidence in our science institutions is holding up.
Mm-hmm. And I think that's something for us to be,
uh, very grateful for.
And I think part of, uh, the, the challenge
for the science system is it's communication
with communities and, and meeting
communities where they're at.
And it is something that I know the government
through the science reforms is particularly, uh, focused
as is on the translation of science to,
uh, real world outcomes.
And there is a particular investment focus
around hazards and resilience.
So I think, um, we've got, uh, we, we've made some,
some progress in that regard,
but I think part of what we've tried to highlight here is
that there is more work to do to build public awareness
around the hazard scape.
And science will be critical to that.
And trust and confidence in our science institutions,
I think, can help depoliticize to an extent,
because I think communities do consider, uh, scientists
to generally be apolitical, uh,
and be, um, uh, neutral on these questions.
Mm-hmm. Many of the issues, particularly in relation
to climate change, as the committee knows, uh,
have become politically contested.
Uh, and as a consequence, I think, uh,
letting the science speak for itself, uh, as a way of
ensuring that we build trust
and confidence, uh, in, in a way that's harder, I guess,
for democratic institutions to do.
So it's in support of local government
and central government in
the decisions that will need to be taken.
Yeah. Thanks, Julian.
You supple on up on that, up On that, if
I just, just in terms of, uh, impacts of projects
that aren't funded that would potentially
help New Zealand be better prepared for these kind of
resilience outcomes that we're trying to achieve here.
What about the very absence of the Climate Resilience fund?
Sorry, the Climate Emergency Resilience Response Fund.
Um, is that in itself, the absence of that, you know,
contributing to our lack of resilience in this area?
So there has continued to be investment in, uh, uh,
flood management.
Mm-hmm. Uh, as the committee will be aware,
and the current investment in infrastructure more broadly,
um, not just roading, uh, uh, in a, in a range
of areas is, uh, helping to build resilience.
So I, I, I think it would be, um, incorrect
to characterize the, uh, the investment in
national infrastructure resilience as, uh,
having been turned off
or no longer continuing despite the
discontinuation of that fund.
So there is still, uh, uh, there is still, um,
a significant investment going in there.
I think what the national infrastructure plan highlighted
earlier this week, however, is
that this is a very long game.
Mm-hmm. And there is a lot
of investment required over a very long period of time.
That's right. And I think it's, um, it's a statement of fact
that New Zealand has a major infrastructure deficit
and that we have a lot of catch up to do over,
over a long period of time.
The affordability of that
and the rate at which we can build further resilience and,
and, uh, maintain our assets
and build new ones are all choices for New Zealanders,
obviously, in terms of a, you know, willingness to pay
and priorities for, for investment.
But yeah. So
David, yeah, it is supplementary and,
and thank you for the report.
I think this is, uh, word is enlightening
and particularly with certain risks that you sort
of look step back
and you think, oh, yeah, I suppose that is absolutely right.
But extending on what LAN's saying then in your commentary,
just then, James, um, at the end of the day,
this committee is, has a, has a very specific purpose,
a very, uh, specific job.
And I think what would help us is probably having greater
visibility of the spend of, with regards
to proactive as well as reactive.
You've spoken to the many billions of dollars
that are spent over the years,
but for us to actually understand better, uh,
what is actually happening, where the trends with regards
to it, I think would be very helpful.
And, uh, an example that comes to mind is, uh, the, uh, uh,
commissioner for the environment with what he does
with the environmental spend, with his, uh, zaki,
um, graph and all that sort of stuff.
I think that would be very helpful for our committee
to be able to work out what are the questions
and who to talk to
to see whether we're doing the best we can possibly do.
Secondly, as a supplementary is about that, uh, priorities.
As you say, James, there's lots of spend
that's on the horizon,
but how do we go about prior we prioritizing
what we're spending on, uh,
recently we've put a big effort into flood management, uh,
and that what's next,
cab off the rank, all that sort of stuff.
I think those are the questions
that I think this committee should be prepared
to be asking whatever entity that we've got in front of you.
So it's, it's actually more of a comment
that I think we could improve upon the information
that would help us to do our job.
Okay. Okay. That's
Good. Good. Thank you. Chair. Can
I suggest that we come back
to the committee, uh, in, in writing with, uh, some response
to either the availability
of the information or with the information?
That'd be great. Thank you. Appreciate that. Right.
So Julianne in the primary.
Yeah. Um, well, actually it's pretty related
to the discussion we've been having.
Thank you so much for the briefing.
Um, given the need to have it be long term
and outside political cycles, um, like to
what extent should we be thinking about something like a
parliamentary commissioner for catastrophic risk
that's sitting a little bit independent of the government
of the day that can advise parliament
and do some of that long-term thinking
and, you know, offer off insights to government departments
because the government
of the day has its own priorities it's selected on,
which are often shorter term.
Yeah. Maybe I'll, I'll add a, um, first response on that.
We've actually got a, a range of tools in the transparency
around, um, ing
and decisions that are made against those becoming more, um,
you know, there's much more information
going into the public domain.
So, um, three years ago there was no national risk
and resilience sort of framework, and now we've got it up.
It's, it's, uh, cabinet document, it's, it's public,
and the risks are against them.
And at the moment, we are going through
and actually just doing a, um, line by line
or a risk by risk review of, um,
what's your maximum credible event,
what's your response readiness,
and what's the, the golf between them?
Because of course, you can never, um,
or you could throw a whole lot
of resource at one particular risk
and never actually yeah, be completely ready.
So I actually think, um, your, your best tool is actually,
um, the transparency of the information and,
and the building awareness with the public
because, um, that information's available to, to all of you,
but actually more importantly, is available to communities.
Communities need to understand, um,
or they'd benefit from understanding where there are gaps,
thinking about how they, as a society, as an individual,
as a family, as a, as a community,
or as a, as an iwi group, um, actually get themselves ready
for particular risk and, and how they're shaped.
So that's a long way of saying, um, I'm not sure
that you would need a independent commissioner.
Um, if there was a sense
that there wasn't enough information
or that choices weren't available and able to prosecute them
and ask questions about them
and challenge them, then maybe there'd be a, a role
for a independent commissioner.
Um, the report identifies
that local government iwi community responses
and readiness is really important.
Um, local government revenue at the moment is only about 4%
of GDP, where central government's 33%.
Um, like, is local government really sufficiently funded
to provide and do that community building
and information sharing that
and infrastructure investment
that might be needed at a local level?
Or does, you know, parliament need to think about
how we can better resource local government
to, to do this work?
Yeah, I, I, it's probably outside of the scope of our, um,
of our, of our briefing, um, to be honest,
because, um, we, we've identified the, the players
and the actors, but how, um,
various entities of funding are,
I mean, I really welcome In the parliament,
The acknowledgement of nature-based solutions
and the, you know, huge potential there.
What we've found is, um, with the shift
to the new water entities, um, in Wellington, for example,
there's local, locally elected representatives
who really want to be able to, um,
invest in these nature-based solutions.
The community wants it,
but now the decisions are gonna be made
by these separate water entities
who are mainly thinking about reticulated solutions.
And, and council has, again, doesn't necessarily have the
capital to be able to make those investments.
The water entities might benefit from it,
but they're just thinking about pipes
and their responsibility.
They don't, they're not thinking about the water
before it gets into the pipes.
How, how can we as parliamentarians, enable local government
to be able to make,
or who, who who really has the incentive
to think about the nature-based solutions?
So I'll make a comment on that.
So the, one of the reasons that, that we wanted to highlight
that, uh, uh, is that, uh,
nature-based solutions often, uh,
cost effective over the longer term.
Uh, and putting a pipe in the ground can often be, uh,
a good short term solution,
but longer term present issues including ongoing ma
maintenance and renewal.
So, um, I think lifting up the, the, the broader sentiment
that the, uh, that the briefings trying to, uh, provoke is
around longer term thinking
and our investment horizons around preparedness,
including an infrastructure investment.
And that comes down to a question
of priorities for communities.
And I think for, for local government in particular, uh, uh,
but also for central government, um, you know,
we're acutely aware of the affordability challenges for, uh,
many communities and households right now with,
with rating burdens as well as insurance on top of that,
as well as, um, the broader economic backdrop.
And so, um, I think we're provoking, uh, local government
to think hard about priorities and, uh, short versus long
and certainly infrastructure
that reduces long-term cost and harm.
Uh, the case we are making here, uh, is, is something
that's well worth, uh, at least being properly considered,
if not being compelling
for investment. I need a quick step on
This person. Yeah. Just, just
on those nature-based solution projects,
is it right that MFE has 20 of these kind
of regional nature-based solution studies that are in
relationship with regional councils?
So slightly different.
Uh, so that's the work we are doing around, uh,
nature credit markets, and there are
20 pilots at the moment.
Oh, so those aren't the, um, resilient rivers.
Oh, sorry, I thought that was the nature-based solutions
for flood mitigation projects.
Oh, yes. So that is, that's, that's, uh, out of the
previous, uh, essential fresh water funding,
there were some projects of that nature.
Okay. Yeah, no, you
That are still in train and working towards,
So pretty much all of that work is coming to an end,
or should have come to an end, uh, by now.
Uh oh, okay. But,
but many of those projects will be continued
by the local authorities that have stimulated them,
and we've highlighted them through various documents.
Um,
Okay. Thank
You. Okay. Cool.
You have a quick supple on this
One. Very quick. Supple. Yeah.
Thank you. Next chair.
Um, I like the nature based solutions
that you've laid out here as well,
and if this committee wanted
to get a bit more information on what that could look like,
what work is underway in that space currently,
do you have suggestions of, of who we could talk to
as there work in MFE, um, that we could look to or others?
Uh, yes. Uh, so, um, uh,
probably one organization worth, uh,
looking at would be the RTRI circle
that's currently been undertaking work on, uh,
a natural infrastructure plan for New Zealand.
Um, and they've been working with, uh, be's been leading
that work on their behalf.
And, uh, it's a collaboration across, um,
the infrastructure commission, uh, range
of government departments and private sector entities too.
So that, that work is, uh, uh, going
to be released later this year.
And we'll be sitting alongside the national infrastructure
plan as a companion document,
and we've been engaged with, um,
the infrastructure commission on
that work coming together. Thanks.
Right. Um, David, you had a primary No, I was
I right Now or doubt.
Okay. Right. Then I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll get a, um,
question you touch on here.
And one of the things, obviously with, um, the recent events
with severe weather and flooding, um,
has there been any work done, uh, look,
look you referenced there, but that shows like over, say,
the last 50 years, is is it becoming more
regular and more intense?
Because this is the discussion we had I have with people.
Some, some people think it's a whole pile of rubb.
Others think it's, well, yes, we are getting that.
So facts and figures would be really helpful.
The number of events, the intensity of them compared now,
compared to 50 years ago would be quite helpful if we're
trying to convince people of
Speak. So,
um, certainly, uh, NEMA has, uh, collated the, uh,
uh, the number of, uh, declared emergencies over, uh,
particularly the last 20 year period.
Mm. And you can see a very dramatic uptick,
particularly in the last seven or eight years.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so certainly that that is true.
And then also, um, our national flood data suggests
that there has been a, uh, a, a, a fairly
significant increase in the last few years as well.
So yes, the data is
available and we can provide the committee. That'd
Be great, that you'd be really helpful.
Yeah. It's equivocal.
Yeah. Well, that would be very helpful, trying
to convince some of those people that think this Yes.
Doesn't exist. Right.
Anyway, next on the list we have, uh, Kim,
Thank you chair.
Uh, I've got a question about, like,
so you've got some risks in here
that are not normally talked about so much, like tsunamis,
um, you know, the old country faces,
but I feel living on a sand spot in and,
and, um, the very imminent, um,
feeling about Mount Taranaki, uh,
and what, what could be coming there considering its
geological history, which I'm sure Mr.
McLeod's thinking about in the back of his mind sometimes.
Um, I've experienced as a, you know,
child at school getting, um, taught about tsunami risk
that my local area faces, and now I'm an mp
and I'm hearing, um, reports, uh, coming
to us saying we've got tsunami and,
and other, um, catastrophic risks.
What sort of, uh, role has been undertaken in making people
aware of what their properties have with o you know,
we have overlays for flooding.
Um, what sort of overlays are there
for property risks from catastrophic events like tsunami
and volcanoes?
Um, and if doing that, what's the benefit?
Uh, what's the, the way up in actually making that decision?
So if you were to say it's a one in 500, um,
tsunami event area, is what risk tolerance does, say mfe,
think it was appropriate to start actually taking a step
of proactively putting that thing on a title?
Is it one in 10,000? Is it one in 50?
Is it, is it expected the next a hundred years,
perhaps like a volcano, we know mm-hmm.
Um, how do we, how do you weigh up the risk
of actually putting that onto properties?
So chair, there's, there's
a, there's a number of issues in there.
First, uh, first of all to say that the, uh, uh, the,
the public awareness and education's typically driven
by local authorities,
and they have responsibilities existing under, uh,
the local government act as well as the, uh,
the Resource Management Act for, uh, hazard management.
So there is a, there is a, um, a set of obligations there
that, that will result typically in councils, uh,
having hazard maps available and, uh, informing communities.
And often that's done through the group civil defense, uh,
effort within a region as well.
Um, much of that work historically has been supported
by Nima, uh, who have funded, for example,
the subduction zone work to understand the, uh, uh, risk
of tsunami on the east coast of, of, of New Zealand.
And that's been done in collaboration
with local authorities.
So it is a partnership between, uh, central
and local government getting more specifically
to hazard standards
and the, the point at which, uh, a decision needs
to be made about a property.
Uh, at the moment, the focus is very heavily
around flood risk, and we've got this work underway
around a national, uh, flood map
that will inform future decision making on that.
Um, there are standards in the building act, for example,
that, that the floor level must be
above a one 50 year event.
The decision to trigger a retreat, um, at the moment, uh,
certainly, uh, uh, has not been contemplated anywhere
that I'm aware of with respect to a tsunami
because of their, um, uh, their, their, their low level
of predictability and their infrequency, if you like.
So the focus around, uh, retreat from, uh, an area
or precluding construction is predominantly around, uh,
flooding and, and coastal inundation.
But I might just ask Catherine,
Whether just on, uh,
the national regulation under the rma,
so we put national policy, state
and further direction, have we got more, uh, specific
guidance in the winds for local authorities on those sort
of, uh, exceedance probabilities?
Can I, can I just, just
before you answer that, um, I just really want
to understand risk tolerance.
Yes. Like, how, how are you, how would you even,
like if MFE was gonna provide advice Yes.
Um, saying, look, at this point, you should, I,
and I don't, I'm not talking about risk Yes.
Of retreat. Sorry. Yes.
I'm talking about retreat, talking about when do you start
saying this property title needs to attach
with it a one in 10,000 chance?
Yep. Like, what's that trigger for different,
specifically volcanoes say in tsunamis?
Like, have you thought about this? Yes. Yes.
So at, at the moment, the,
those judgments about risk tolerances are left
with local government who have the responsibilities,
but there is work underway as part of
what will be rolled out to support the
planning system reforms.
And that can, driving the consistency
of standards across the country
around it should be the same in different places
in terms of that tolerance.
Not necessarily the same for all hazards.
You might have a different tolerance
for tsunami versus flooding,
but there is work, um, that will come underway
after the legislation has passed
to drive quite a consistency in that. Thank
You.
Um, supplementary then we'll go to,
Just picking up on your mention of managed retreat,
and I get that you were talking in terms of tsunami
and it hasn't gone there,
but I noticed the, um, I think it's the section
existing work is building momentum.
It doesn't mention either the previous government
or the current government's inquiry into managed retreat.
Mm-hmm. Where does that sit and,
and why wasn't it talked about as part of this?
Is it just 'cause it isn't concluded or
What?
Uh, well, um, the inquiries, uh, uh,
are complete in terms of the advice to government.
So, um, the previous, uh, inquiry, uh,
working group actually,
and then there was inquiry by this select committee, uh,
and their recommendations have come forward.
Cabinets received those as have as the advice
of the independent expert group that was assembled, uh,
around adaptation.
So all that's fed into the policy decision making.
So, so that work is complete.
The work that's now underway is the preparation
of legislation to come
before this house, which, uh, minister Watts has, um,
has indicated as a priority for government
and, uh, to be introduced this term.
So we, we are currently working
with parliamentary council on that.
Okay. Done. Ryan Primary. Thanks, chair.
Um, thanks for your presentation.
Um, One of the common themes I've seen over the
last, the framework
We did, um, parliamentary commissioners always, um,
going on about it, and it's,
and it's sort of, um, riddled throughout your report too,
is, is data consistency of data, housing, of data, um,
you know, we've got flood mapping, you've got earthquake,
you have all these different measures of metrics.
Um, do you have a view on who or where this should be housed
and or, uh, does it need, um,
I'll ask you something out of scope,
but does it need a political direction
or is it inhouse internally?
You know, how do we grip this up
and have a, a single source of truth, you know,
across such a small country,
Uh, the science system reforms have, um,
uh, are partway through.
So, uh, there are some changes to, uh,
the funding institutions that are underway at the moment,
um, uh, which are aimed at providing
particularly greater stability of funding
for core national data sets
and core, uh, science infrastructure.
Mm-hmm. So, so that Work Envy is currently shepherding
through part of those reforms.
Were creating the public research organizations
and the creation of Earth Sciences New Zealand was
specifically to bring net service niwa
and GNSS capabilities around hazard information
together in a unified way.
And I think what we've seen recently is how climate science
that formally was held by nema niwa, sorry, uh,
weather forecasting undertaken by net net service
and landslide risk, uh, that GNS are responsible
for actually all combine when it comes
to severe weather events.
So bringing those organizations together has been the first
step at creating a national capability that is end
to end the question.
Now that becomes one of, uh, ongoing and future investment,
and that's the work that, uh, uh,
NB currently have underway.
So, um, that, but look, there's the science responsibility
and then there's responsibility, uh,
within central government for, uh, ensuring that there is,
uh, sufficient, uh, science
and data to underpin decision making.
Uh, and that sits under the broader architecture that, uh,
that, that been referred to that Dpmc is leaving.
So, just a supplementary, are you confident
that it's going towards urgents in terms
of some entity housing it rather than multiple housing,
you know, entities, housing bits and pieces
and disparate information across councils regions?
Uh, so, so I would say, say yes,
but we, we should also acknowledge that there will continue
to be a role for local authorities
and also for the private sector insurers, banks, uh,
the Natural Hazards Commission
for making their own investments in, in, in data sets
and things that are useful to them.
So we don't wanna crowd out the effort by others,
but what we do want to have is a, is a, is a base level
of national capability that's available for, for everyone.
And then if others build, uh, off the back of that,
we have a system wide coordination around that effort.
So it, it, it is both a, so it's a hub
and spoke really, uh, type model and,
and that's what we're working towards at the moment.
Thanks, Ken.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Auckland Council responded, uh,
has responded relatively well
and relatively urgently, um, uh,
post the 2023 floods, um, with its, um,
zoning changes, uh, as we've seen.
And, um, uh, but Auckland Council comes
with a revenue rates revenue of $3 billion
and a staff of 12,000 people.
Mm-hmm. Um, how confident are you are, are you that some
of these smaller territorial local authorities mm-hmm.
And frankly, that's where a lot of the natural hazards are
and events are happening, uh, that they can fund, uh,
and resource, um, you know, better planning rules
and, uh, the better protections, um, through the,
through down zonings and retreats
and the likes, uh, going forward,
Uh, I think it's, it's obvious that we've got, uh,
councils in parts of the country where they're, uh,
geographically extensive, hazard prone, uh,
and yet low socioeconomic
or low population density,
RAF Gisborne district is a classic case in point.
Mm-hmm. So, um, that,
that is why these matters are not left entirely
for our local authorities
and central government partners
with those local authorities, uh, in response.
Um, but I, I think that the member raises a, um, uh,
a deep question for New Zealand about
long-term affordability.
So we are currently the ministry
of the environment's currently working
with treasury on advice
to government following the previous work of this committee
and previous, uh, work undertaken about cost sharing.
And the, the, the balance we need to strike as a country is,
is maximizing the effectiveness of our insurance markets
and having, uh, insurance do as much
of the heavy lifting as possible.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and not crowding that out
or creating moral hazard around the taxpayer riding
to the rescue, uh, in each and every occasion.
Mm-hmm. Um, on the other hand, uh, there are communities,
uh, and particularly local authorities
that will not have the financial resources
to, to, to deal with it.
So there is gonna be a role for, um, public expenditure
and striking the balance around that
and creating the right incentives is core to the work
that we are presently doing for government. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Sean, you did you want one short
Question? Oh, just, just
a supplementary on that. Okay.
Then that'll be the last one.
Yeah, sure. So just on the kind of,
'cause I, I get like, ideally we would be in a great
position for research and prediction and all that,
but how big is the gap in
that basic information understanding and,
and the funding of like, you know,
because the question was raised,
will local government be able to afford it?
I think it's like clear
that they cannot afford it on a case by case basis.
That's the whole point that we need to do this together.
But what are the gaps like in Wide did up,
we just had this splitting, as far as I understand,
there's no detailed mapping of southern wided up.
So how, how bad is that across the country?
Uh, so, uh, you wanna mention Ben?
Well, so, so that is work that has been commissioned
and is now underway to undertake
stock take of what we've got.
Yeah. Um, because we've had the institutions in reform, uh,
it is important that we, we ensure
that in the first instance, our existing capability is,
is joined up and as delivered as efficiently as possible.
So, so that is, that is the reform underway right now.
But there is a gap analysis, uh, which has, um,
just recently been commissioned to ensure
that we've got a good handle on, uh, on the opportunities
for future investments
and the various trade offs around that.
So, uh, that's something that we would be in a position
as agencies, particularly between DPMC
and to come back to the committee, uh, later in the year,
uh, once we've undertaken that work and, uh,
provided advice to ministers.
Well, we've reached our time, so thanks very much.
It was, uh, very informative and very sobering,
but, um, I don't think any of us are unaware
of the challenges we face as a country.
Thank you very much. Thank You.